dpq2
====
This is yet another attempt to create a good interface to PostgreSQL from the 
D programming language.

It is doesn't add overhead to the original low level library libpq but
make convenient use PostgreSQL from D.

_upd: I slightly abandoned dpq2 because https://github.com/DSoftOut/pgator-backend was written. It contains better PG types support with many bug fixes (code rewritten from zero)._


Features
--------

* Arguments list support
* Binary and text data queries
* Async queries support
* Reading of the text query results to native D text types
* Representation of the binary query results to native D types
 * Text types
 * Integer and decimal types (except "numeric")
 * Timestamp type (with and without timezone)
* Access to PostgreSQL's multidimensional arrays (only in binary mode)
* LISTEN/NOTIFY support

Building
--------

####Requirements:
Currently code builds with libpq 9.1.0 and higher, compiler dmd 2.062 and higher.
Bindings for libpq can be static or dynamic, compilation described below.

Instead of explicitly installing dpq2, it is now recommended to use 
[DUB](https://github.com/rejectedsoftware/dub) for building dpq2 based
applications. Once DUB is installed, you can create a new project by running
`dub init <name>` and enable the use of dpq2 by adding the following
dependency to the `package.json` file in your project's directory:

    {
        "name": "your-project-identifier",
        "dependencies": {
            "dpq2": "~master"
        }
    }

Invoking `dub` will then automatically download the latest dpq2 and compile
and run the project.
If you want only to build your project run `dub build`.

Similarly, you can run an example by invoking `dub` from any of the
example project directories.

If you want to install dpq2 explicitly, you can use:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/denizzzka/dpq2.git
cd dpq2
```

The static bindings are generated by default. Add `--config=dynamic`
to the `dub` parameters to generate dynamic bindings.

The debug version is generated by default. Add `--build=release`
to the `dub` parameters to generate release version.

####Static bindings - debug version
    $ dub build

####Static bindings - release version
    $ dub --build=release build

####Dynamic bindings - debug version
    $ dub --config=dynamic build

####Dynamic bindings - release version
    $ dub --config=dynamic --build=release build

####Integration testing (see below)
    $ cd integration_tests
    $ dub
    $ dub --build=release
    $ dub --config=dynamic
    $ dub --config=dynamic --build=release

####Example compilation
    $ cd example
    $ dub
    $ dub --build=release
    $ dub --config=dynamic
    $ dub --config=dynamic --build=release

Example
-------
####Source
```D
#!/usr/bin/env rdmd

import dpq2.all;
import std.stdio: writeln;

void main()
{
    Connection conn = new Connection;
    conn.connString = "host=localhost port=5432 dbname=postgres user=postgres password=******";
    conn.connect();

    // Text query result
    auto s = conn.exec(
        "SELECT now() as current_time, 'abc'::text as field_name, "
        "123 as field_3, 456.78 as field_4"
        );
        
    writeln( "1: ", s[0][3].as!PGtext );

    // Binary query result
    static queryArg arg;
    queryParams p;
    p.resultFormat = valueFormat.BINARY;
    p.sqlCommand = "SELECT "
        "-1234.56789012345::double precision, "
        "'2012-10-04 11:00:21.227803+08'::timestamp with time zone, "
        "'first line\nsecond line'::text, "
        "NULL, "
        "array[1, 2, NULL]::integer[]";
    
    
    auto r = conn.exec( p );    
 
    writeln( "2: ", r[0][0].as!PGdouble_precision );
    writeln( "3: ", r[0][1].as!PGtime_stamp.toSimpleString );
    writeln( "4: ", r[0][2].as!PGtext );
    writeln( "5: ", r[0].isNULL(3) );
    writeln( "6: ", r[0][4].asArray.getValue(1).as!PGinteger );
    writeln( "7: ", r[0][4].asArray.isNULL(0) );
    writeln( "8: ", r[0][4].asArray.isNULL(2) );
}

```
####Compile and run
Static bindings (requires libpq.a libcom_err.a):
```sh
$ cd example
$ dub
1: 456.78
2: -1234.57
3: 0013-Oct-05 03:00:21.227803Z
4: first line
second line
5: true
6: 2
7: false
8: true
```
Dynamic bindings (requires libpq.so libssl.so libcrypto.so for linux, libpq.dll libeay32.dll ssleay32.dll for win):
```sh
$ cd example
$ dub --config=dynamic
1: 456.78
2: -1234.57
3: 0013-Oct-05 03:00:21.227803Z
4: first line
second line
5: true
6: 2
7: false
8: true
```

Integration testing
----------

Code contains integration tests. Integration testing requires access to any PostgreSQL server with
permissions to run SELECT statements.

After building dpq2-integration_tests file integration_tests/bin/dpq2-integration_tests can be executed.
Option "--conninfo" may contain connection string as described in [PostgreSQL documentation]
(http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/libpq-connect.html#LIBPQ-CONNSTRING).

For default connection to DB type:

```sh
$ cd integration_tests
$ dub
```
Connection to usually available database "postgres":
```sh
$ cd integration_tests
$ dub -- --conninfo "dbname=postgres"
```
Network connection:
```sh
$ cd integration_tests
$ dub -- --conninfo "host=123.45.67.89 dbname=testdb user=testuser password=123123"
```

TODO
----

* Row by row result reading
* Binary arguments types
* PostGIS binary data support
* Checking types by Oid
* Make code more transparent, CamelCased and Autodoc
